---
layout: post
title: "SQL Notes fo MLOps"
categories: ML
date:   2021-10-09 22:54:40 +0300
excerpt: How to navigate through relational dabases
---

* content
{:toc}

System specifications used in these notes are such as following:

- OS: Ubuntu 18.04.5 LTS x86_64 
- Kernel: 5.4.0-81-generic 
- Shell: bash 4.4.20 
- CPU: Intel i5-8265U (8) @ 3.900GHz 
- GPU: Intel UHD Graphics 620 

# Introduction

A **database (DB)** is a collection of information. To manage and utilize a DB, a software called **database management system (DBMS)** is used. DBMSs enable the basic operation abbreviated as CRUD which is create, read, update and delete. 

There are 2 types of DBs: Relational and non-relational. Relational DBs are composed of various tables whose single row indicates an entry and column indicates a feature. Non-relational DB is everything other than a relational DB.

| | Relational DB (SQL) | Non-relational DB (NoSQL) |
|:---|:---|:---|
| Description | Multiple tables, each table has rows and columns | Anything but a table |
| DBMS | MySQL, Oracle | MongoDb, Firebase |
| Query Language | Structured Query Language | No standard language |

Columns of a table are called features or keys:
    
- Surrogate key doesn't have meaning corresponding to real life.
- Natural key is meaningful like social security number.
- Foreign key establish connection between different tables.

**Queries** are the main way to interact with a DB. 

# Installing MySQL DBMS

Installing `mysql` on ubuntu with apt bypasses the root password step. Therefore if you run `sudo mysql -u root -p'`, you automatically prompt the terminal. To prevent this, follow the above step:

    sudo mysql -u root -p

In `mysql` terminal

    USE mysql;
    UPDATE user SET plugin='mysql_native_password' WHERE User='root';
    FLUSH PRIVILEGES;
    exit;

Restart and run the commands below to set a new password.

    sudo systemctl restart mysql.service

After that, run the commands below to secure MySQL server and create a new root password.

    sudo mysql_secure_installation

When prompted, answer the questions below by following the guide.

    Enter current password for root (enter for none): Just press Enter
    Set root password? [Y/n]: Y
    New password: Enter password
    Re-enter new password: Repeat password
    Remove anonymous users? [Y/n]: Y
    Disallow root login remotely? [Y/n]: Y
    Remove test database and access to it? [Y/n]:  Y
    Reload privilege tables now? [Y/n]:  Y

You should now be able to log on with password authentication.

#  Basic SQL Syntax and Executive Summary

Before starting, the most important point about SQL is that it's not an **imperative** language. A snippet of SQL code is not run from beginning to end such languages like C or Python. It's a **declerative** language meaning we describe what we try to accomplish and write that in terms of queries. Here's a table of overview about SQL sublanguages:

| Sublanguage | Description | Common Commands |
| --- | --- | --- |
| **Data Querly Language (DQL)** | query db and retrieve information, not change it | `SELECT` |
| **Data Definition Language (DDL)** | create and modify db | `CREATE, ALTER, DROP` |
| **Data Manipulation Language (DML)** | modify db | `INSERT, UPDATE, DELETE` |
| **Data Control Language (DCL)** | Controlling access to db | `GRANT, REVOKE` |
| **Transaction Control Language (TCL)** | Managing transactions in db | `COMMIT, ROLLBACK` |

- Order of Execution goes like this as opposed to procedural languages that are run from beginning:
    1. `FROM`
    2. `WHERE`
    3. `GROUP BY`
    4. `HAVING`
    5. `SELECT`
    6. `ORDER BY`

- Main keywords are as follows:
```sql
 SELECT  * FROM table_name -- extracts data from a database
 UPDATE table_name SET column1=value1, ... where condition-- updates data in a database
 DELETE FROM table_name WHERE condition -- deletes data from a database
 INSERT INTO table_name (col1,...) VALUES (val1,...)-- inserts new data into a database
 CREATE DATABASE database_name-- creates a new database
 ALTER DATABASE -- modifies a database
 CREATE TABLE -- creates a new table
 ALTER TABLE -- modifies a table
 DROP TABLE -- deletes a table
 CREATE INDEX -- creates an index (search key)
 DROP INDEX -- deletes an index
```


Filtering results:

```sql
SELECT /* Attributes */
FROM /* Table name */
WHERE /* Conditions */
```

Inserting into table:

```sql
INSERT INTO table (attribute_name_1, ... atribute_name_N)
VALUES (attribute_value1, ... , atribute_valueN)
```

Backing up a table

```sql
SELECT * INTO table_backup FROM table
```

Deleting a table

```sql
DELETE FROM table
```
However, this command keeps an auto incremented id intact. So to truly wipe out use
```sql
TRUNCATE TABLE table_name
```

Normalization process eliminates duplicate attributes and redundant records in additon to preserving data integrity. 


# Uygulamalarla SQL Ogreniyorum

- SQL is a declerative language so it needs to be embedded into a scripting language for query results.

- `TABLE TRUNCATE` empties table

- `DELETE table` deletes records but keeps id

- If you cannot alter table, change `tools > options > designers > prevent table recreation 

- Columns can be indexed by numbers such as 1,2,3...

- `SELECT TOP N (Percent)` for mssqls, `TOP` for mysql

- Where usage is inappropriate for aggregate function. Instead, having clause should be used.
 
- Relational database means relating different tables to each other. This relationa is called a schema.

- If a column has repeating values, we can write a separate table for that column and relate them to each other with foreign keys. Every table has a primary key. 

- `JOIN` and INNER `JOIN` is the same and purely for synthactic sugar

- `SET STATISTICS IO ON` is for code analytics.

- For declaring a variable:
    ```sql
    DECLARE @var as type
    SET @var = 
    ```

# Alıştırmalarla SQL Öğreniyorum

- It's very hard to change collation while migrating a database, therefore extra effort need for choosing default collation.

- Every subquery needs to be aliased. 

- Excel code for data generation: `="INSERT INTO DISTRICTS (CITYID, DISTRICT) VALUES ('"&B2&"', '"&C2&"')"`

- For checking `NULL` `is` operator should be use. 
`WHERE VALUE IS NULL`

- To add a record with a given automatically increasing ID
`SET IDENTITY_INSERT CITIES ON` should be added to the code

- To produce a result with a single row and columns as the aggregate of columns:
    1. Add new columns as mask such that 1 or 0 for condition
    2. Then add the column values using `SUM` function

- `UNION` command is used for merging tables vertically which has the same number of columns.

- SQL `SELECT` statement brings results randomly in case of `JOIN` statements.

- `WHERE` statement might have conditions with unkown string types. Here's an example:

    ```sql
    DECLARE @city_names AS VARCHAR(100)

    SELECT *
    FROM table_name
    WHERE CITY IN (SELECT VALUE FROM string_split(@city_names, delimiter))
    ```

- Combining values into a single column use the following code:

    ```sql
    SELECT col_name + 'delimiter'
    ....
    FOR XML PATH ('')
    ```
